Module – 1 
Introduction: When simulation is the appropriate tool and when it is not 
appropriate, Advantages and disadvantages of Simulation; Areas of application, 
Systems and system environment; Components of a system; Discrete and 
continuous systems, Model of a system; Types of Models, Discrete-Event System 
Simulation Simulation examples: Simulation of queuing systems. General 
Principles, Simulation Software:Concepts in Discrete-Event Simulation. The 
Event-Scheduling / Time-Advance Algorithm, Manual simulation Using Event 
Scheduling 

Module – 2 
Statistical Models in Simulation :Review of terminology and concepts, Useful 
statistical models,Discrete distributions. Continuous distributions,Poisson 
process, Empirical distributions. 
Queuing Models:Characteristics of queuing systems,Queuing notation,Long-run 
measures of performance of queuing systems,Long-run measures of performance 
of queuing systems cont…,Steady-state behavior of M/G/1 queue, Networks of 
queues.

Module – 3 
Random-NumberGeneration:Properties of random numbers; Generation of 
pseudo-random numbers, Techniques for generating random numbers,Tests for 
Random Numbers, Random-Variate Generation: ,Inverse transform technique 
Acceptance-Rejection technique. 

Module – 4 
Input Modeling: Data Collection; Identifying the distribution with data, 
Parameter estimation, Goodness of Fit Tests, Fitting a non-stationary Poisson 
process, Selecting input models without data, Multivariate and Time-Series input 
models. 
Estimation of Absolute Performance: Types of simulations with respect to 
output analysis ,Stochastic nature of output data, Measures of performance and 
their estimation, Contd..

Module - 5
Measures of performance and their estimation,Output analysis for terminating 
simulations Continued..,Output analysis for steady-state simulations. 
Verification, Calibration And Validation: Optimization: Model building, 
verification and validation, Verification of simulation models, Verification of
simulation models,Calibration and validation of models, Optimization via 
Simulation.
